README.md, before:

# pytorch-gpu-data-science-project

Repository containing scaffolding for a Python 3-based data science project with GPU acceleration using the [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/) ecosystem. 

## Creating a new project from this template

Simply follow the [instructions](https://help.github.com/en/articles/creating-a-repository-from-a-template) to create a new project repository from this template.

## Project organization

Project organization is based on ideas from [_Good Enough Practices for Scientific Computing_](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510).

1. Put each project in its own directory, which is named after the project.
2. Put external scripts or compiled programs in the `bin` directory.
3. Put raw data and metadata in a `data` directory.
4. Put text documents associated with the project in the `doc` directory.
5. Put all Docker related files in the `docker` directory.
6. Install the Conda environment into an `env` directory. 
7. Put all notebooks in the `notebooks` directory.
8. Put files generated during cleanup and analysis in a `results` directory.
9. Put project source code in the `src` directory.
10. Name all files to reflect their content or function.

## Installing NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit

### Workstation

You will need to have the [appropriate version](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit-archive) 
of the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit installed on your workstation. For PyTorch you should install 
[NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit 10.1](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-10.1-download-archive-update2) 
[(documentation)](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/archive/10.1/).

After installing the appropriate version of the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit you will need to set the 
following environment variables.

```bash
$ export CUDA_HOME=/usr/local/cuda-10.1
$ export PATH=$CUDA_HOME/bin:$PATH
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$CUDA_HOME/lib64:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

### Ibex

Ibex users do not neet to install NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit as the relevant versions have already been 
made available on Ibex by the Ibex Systems team. Users simply need to load the appropriate version 
using the `module` tool. 

```bash
$ module load cuda/10.1.243
```

## Building the Conda environment

After adding any necessary dependencies that should be downloaded via `conda` to the 
`environment.yml` file and any dependencies that should be downloaded via `pip` to the 
`requirements.txt` file you create the Conda environment in a sub-directory `./env`of your project 
directory by running the following commands.

```bash
$ export ENV_PREFIX=$PWD/env
$ export HOROVOD_CUDA_HOME=$CUDA_HOME
$ export HOROVOD_NCCL_HOME=$ENV_PREFIX
$ export HOROVOD_GPU_ALLREDUCE=NCCL
$ export HOROVOD_GPU_BROADCAST=NCCL
$ conda env create --prefix $ENV_PREFIX --file environment.yml --force
```

Once the new environment has been created you can activate the environment with the following 
command.

```bash
$ conda activate $ENV_PREFIX
(/path/to/env) $
```

Note that the `ENV_PREFIX` directory is *not* under version control as it can always be re-created as 
necessary.

### Building JupyterLab extensions (optional)

If you wish to use any JupyterLab extensions included in the `environment.yml` and `requirements.txt` 
files then you need to activate the environment and rebuild the JupyterLab application using the 
following commands to source the `postBuild` script.

```bash
$ conda activate $ENV_PREFIX # optional if environment already active
(/path/to/env) $ . postBuild
```

### Verifying the Conda environment

After building the Conda environment you can check that Horovod has been built with support for 
TensorFlow and MPI with the following command.

```bash
$ conda activate $ENV_PREFIX # optional if environment already active
(/path/to/env) $ horovodrun --check-build
```

You should see output similar to the following.

```
Horovod v0.19.0:

Available Frameworks:
    [ ] TensorFlow
    [X] PyTorch
    [ ] MXNet

Available Controllers:
    [X] MPI
    [X] Gloo

Available Tensor Operations:
    [X] NCCL
    [ ] DDL
    [ ] CCL
    [X] MPI
    [X] Gloo  
```

### Listing the full contents of the Conda environment

The list of explicit dependencies for the project are listed in the `environment.yml` file. To see 
the full lost of packages installed into the environment run the following command.

```bash
conda list --prefix $ENV_PREFIX
```

### Updating the Conda environment

If you add (remove) dependencies to (from) the `environment.yml` file or the `requirements.txt` file 
after the environment has already been created, then you can re-create the environment with the 
following command.

```bash
$ conda env create --prefix $ENV_PREFIX --file environment.yml --force
```

## Using Docker

In order to build Docker images for your project and run containers with GPU acceleration you will 
need to install 
[Docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/), 
[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) and the 
[NVIDIA Docker runtime](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker).

Detailed instructions for using Docker to build and image and launch containers can be found in 
the `docker/README.md`.

Commit message:

Added a script to ease environment creation

README.md, after:

# pytorch-gpu-data-science-project

Repository containing scaffolding for a Python 3-based data science project with GPU acceleration using the [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/) ecosystem. 

## Creating a new project from this template

Simply follow the [instructions](https://help.github.com/en/articles/creating-a-repository-from-a-template) to create a new project repository from this template.

## Project organization

Project organization is based on ideas from [_Good Enough Practices for Scientific Computing_](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510).

1. Put each project in its own directory, which is named after the project.
2. Put external scripts or compiled programs in the `bin` directory.
3. Put raw data and metadata in a `data` directory.
4. Put text documents associated with the project in the `doc` directory.
5. Put all Docker related files in the `docker` directory.
6. Install the Conda environment into an `env` directory. 
7. Put all notebooks in the `notebooks` directory.
8. Put files generated during cleanup and analysis in a `results` directory.
9. Put project source code in the `src` directory.
10. Name all files to reflect their content or function.

## Installing NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit

### Workstation

You will need to have the [appropriate version](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit-archive) 
of the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit installed on your workstation. For PyTorch you should install 
[NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit 10.1](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-10.1-download-archive-update2) 
[(documentation)](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/archive/10.1/).

After installing the appropriate version of the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit you will need to set the 
following environment variables.

```bash
$ export CUDA_HOME=/usr/local/cuda-10.1
$ export PATH=$CUDA_HOME/bin:$PATH
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$CUDA_HOME/lib64:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

### Ibex

Ibex users do not neet to install NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit as the relevant versions have already been 
made available on Ibex by the Ibex Systems team. Users simply need to load the appropriate version 
using the `module` tool. 

```bash
$ module load cuda/10.1.243
```

## Building the Conda environment

After adding any necessary dependencies that should be downloaded via `conda` to the 
`environment.yml` file and any dependencies that should be downloaded via `pip` to the 
`requirements.txt` file you create the Conda environment in a sub-directory `./env`of your project 
directory by running the following commands.

```bash
export ENV_PREFIX=$PWD/env
export HOROVOD_CUDA_HOME=$CUDA_HOME
export HOROVOD_NCCL_HOME=$ENV_PREFIX
export HOROVOD_GPU_ALLREDUCE=NCCL
export HOROVOD_GPU_BROADCAST=NCCL
conda env create --prefix $ENV_PREFIX --file environment.yml --force
```

Once the new environment has been created you can activate the environment with the following 
command.

```bash
conda activate $ENV_PREFIX
```

Note that the `ENV_PREFIX` directory is *not* under version control as it can always be re-created as 
necessary.

If you wish to use any JupyterLab extensions included in the `environment.yml` and `requirements.txt` 
files then you need to activate the environment and rebuild the JupyterLab application using the 
following commands to source the `postBuild` script.

```bash
conda activate $ENV_PREFIX # optional if environment already active
. postBuild
```

For your convenience these commands have been combined in a shell script `./bin/create-conda-env.sh`. 
Running the shell script will set the Horovod build variables correctly, create the Conda environment, 
activate the Conda environment, and built JupyterLab with any additional extensions. The script should 
be run from the project root directory as follows. 
follows.

```bash
./bin/create-conda-env.sh # assumes that $CUDA_HOME is set properly
```

### Verifying the Conda environment

After building the Conda environment you can check that Horovod has been built with support for 
TensorFlow and MPI with the following command.

```bash
conda activate $ENV_PREFIX # optional if environment already active
horovodrun --check-build
```

You should see output similar to the following.

```
Horovod v0.19.0:

Available Frameworks:
    [ ] TensorFlow
    [X] PyTorch
    [ ] MXNet

Available Controllers:
    [X] MPI
    [X] Gloo

Available Tensor Operations:
    [X] NCCL
    [ ] DDL
    [ ] CCL
    [X] MPI
    [X] Gloo  
```

### Listing the full contents of the Conda environment

The list of explicit dependencies for the project are listed in the `environment.yml` file. To see 
the full lost of packages installed into the environment run the following command.

```bash
conda list --prefix $ENV_PREFIX
```

### Updating the Conda environment

If you add (remove) dependencies to (from) the `environment.yml` file or the `requirements.txt` file 
after the environment has already been created, then you can re-create the environment with the 
following command.

```bash
$ conda env create --prefix $ENV_PREFIX --file environment.yml --force
```

## Using Docker

In order to build Docker images for your project and run containers with GPU acceleration you will 
need to install 
[Docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/), 
[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) and the 
[NVIDIA Docker runtime](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker).

Detailed instructions for using Docker to build and image and launch containers can be found in 
the `docker/README.md`.
